WIP BXMSDOC-8000 & BXMSDOC-8001: Update Kogito book as per 7.12 STP BAPLs (#72)
hmanwani-rh/kie-docs: doc-content/enterprise-only/getting-started-kogito/proc-kogito-prometheus-metrics-monitoring.adoc

[id="proc-kogito-prometheus-metrics-monitoring_{context}"]
= Enabling Prometheus metrics monitoring in {KOGITO}

[role="_abstract"]
https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus] is an open source systems monitoring toolkit that you can use with {KOGITO} to collect and store metrics related to the execution of Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) process models, business rules, and Decision Model and Notation (DMN) decision models. You can access the stored metrics through a REST API call to a configured application endpoint, through the Prometheus expression browser, or using a data-graphing tool such as https://grafana.com/[Grafana].

.Prerequisites
* Prometheus is installed. For information about downloading and using Prometheus, see the https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/[Prometheus documentation page].

.Procedure

> . In your project, depending on the framework you are using, add one of the following dependencies to the `pom.xml` file to enable the Prometheus add-on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To enable the Prometheus add-on in  your project, add one of the following dependencies to the `pom.xml` file  depending on the framework you are using :
```

Author: Done

+
--

> .Add dependency for Prometheus Quarkus add-on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dependency for the Prometheus Quarkus add-on
```

Author: Done

[source,xml,subs="+quotes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus</artifactId>

>   <version>__KOGITO_VERSION__</version>

Reviewer: Although it is obvious, you need to define KOGITO_VERSION in the introduction to the example.

</dependency>
----

> .Add dependency for Prometheus Spring Boot add-on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Dependency for the Prometheus Spring Boot add-on
```

Reviewer: Labels should be noun phrases

Author: Done

[source,xml,subs="+quotes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-addons-springboot-monitoring-prometheus</artifactId>
  <version>__KOGITO_VERSION__</version>
</dependency>
----

> By default, all stored metrics are exported to the configured monitoring module. If you want to disable certain metrics from being exported, you can set any of the following properties in the `application.properties` file of your project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Optional:  Set any of the following properties in the `application.properties` file of your project to prevent specific metrics from being exported. By default, all stored metrics are exported to the configured monitoring module. 
```

Author: Done

> .Enable or disable specific metrics from being exported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Metrics properties disabled for export
```

Author: Changed to "Specific metrics disabled for export"

[source]
----
kogito.monitoring.rule.useDefault=false
kogito.monitoring.process.useDefault=false
kogito.monitoring.interceptor.useDefault=false
----
--

> . In the `prometheus.yaml` file of your Prometheus distribution, add the following settings in the `scrape_configs` section to configure Prometheus to scrape metrics from your {KOGITO} microservice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To configure Prometheus to scrape metrics from your {KOGITO} microservice, add the following settings to the `scrape_configs` section in the `prometheus.yaml` file of your Prometheus distribution:
```

Author: Done

+
--

> .Example scrape configurations in `prometheus.yaml` file

Reviewer: Good label!

[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
scrape_configs:
  job_name: 'kogito-metrics'
metrics_path: /metrics
static_configs:
  - targets: ["localhost:8080"]
----

Replace the values according to your {KOGITO} microservice settings.
--

> . In a command terminal, navigate to your project and run the project using your preferred run mode, such as development mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In a command terminal, navigate to your project and run the project in your preferred mode, for example development mode:
```

Author: Done

+
--
.On Quarkus
[source]
----
mvn clean compile quarkus:dev
----

> .On Sprint Boot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.On Spring Boot
```

[source]
----
mvn clean compile spring-boot:run
----

After you start your {KOGITO} microservice, Prometheus begins collecting metrics and {KOGITO} publishes the metrics to the configured REST API endpoint.
--

> . To verify the metrics configuration, use a REST client or curl utility to send a `GET` request to the configured `/metrics` endpoint, such as `\http://localhost:8080/metrics` in this example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To verify the metrics configuration, use a REST client or curl utility to send a `GET` request to the configured `/metrics` endpoint, for example `\http://localhost:8080/metrics`:
```

Author: Done
